welcome back again everyone lazel
montgomery here for you
still this time with part three in our
multi-episode series covering the
history of the jewish refugees in china
during the first half of the 20th
century we left off last time at the end
of 1937
beginning in 1938 with yellow lights
flashing 24 hours a day for the jews of
europe who were
caught up in hitler's continental
ambitions
even though much worse days lie ahead
jewish families parents grandparents and
children were
already being traumatized in their daily
life by all the consequences of
having their comfortable and familiar
life torn out by the roots
and over in shanghai and all the other
major towns and cities along the yangtze
river
chinese locals were getting brutalized
by the japanese military
as with the european jews there was
very little these chinese civilians can
do to defend themselves against their
antagonizers
and in both cases no one was rushing to
the front of the line to help them out
in this hour of need
jews and chinese often speak of their
shared suffering
and this was one of those times more
than half a million in germany
a couple hundred thousand in austria
plus
romania hungary poland
that's a lot of jews and many of them
had the same idea
better get out before it gets any worse
a lot of them headed to
palestine which didn't go down too well
with the arab majority already there
in the world's wealthiest nations were
looking at each other waiting to see who
was going to do
something about this this jewish problem
as it came to be known
and to deal with this jewish problem a
conference was convened at the
instigation of fdr
in avian france between july 6th
and july 15 1938
32 countries got together and tried to
hash things out about
taking in some of these great numbers of
refugees and
upping their quotas there was plenty of
discussion and argument about how to
deal with this
matter before them but when the avian
conference concluded
only the dominican republic birthplace
of roberto clemente
only they stepped up and said they'll
take a hundred thousand jewish refugees
everyone else including the united
states
sat on their hands despite this urgent
spike in demand there would be no
changes to the existing quotas they said
oh boy hitler had a field day with that
one nazi propagandist
jumped all over those results of the
avion conference that seemed to validate
their claims that
no one wanted these jewish criminals
well
that slammed the door shut on a lot of
people's plans
you know getting a visa to the united
states was like winning the powerball
but there were plenty of other places
these german and austrian jews were
happy to go to
many went to france but you know how
that turned out later on
a lot got out and like the chinese who
left china in hard times these jews
dispersed themselves all over the world
as
so many began exploring their options to
add further misery to the plight of the
european jews
for the sake of peace in our time
september 30th 1938
germany acquired the sudetenland the
german-ish part of
czechoslovakia which added another 120
000 jews to the list of
stateless persons desperately looking
for a way out
so you can see why under these
circumstances
why people paid attention to these
rumors that got out about shanghai
as a potential place of refuge it said
the rumors about shanghai started in
vienna it spread from there
after a great deal of reflection no
doubt many a jewish adult figured
as bad as it was as terrifying as the
newsreels made it look with all the
bombed out buildings and streets
there were already plenty of jews living
in shanghai including more than 6 000
from russia who
had ended up there over the past few
decades under
similar circumstances that the european
jews now faced so given the hobson's
choice they were left with
the idea started to catch fire and
though not everyone acted on it
if worst came to worst a lot of jews
kept this
shanghai option in the back of their
mind
it's 80 years ago this year november 9th
kristallnacht the night of broken glass
this was the terrible night of
destruction
and brutality when the nazis declared it
open season on the jews
if you saw schindler's list you probably
remember that scene very well
following this terrifying event if there
were any doubting thomases among the
german and austrian jews
who thought they could ride this this
hitler thing out
kristel nacht made everyone a believer
this is when the stream of jews sailing
to shanghai
turned into a torrent and matters that
before were
merely urgent now became matters of life
and death
all the available options is
unpalatable as they were back in 1935 36
and 37
were now no longer available as options
and with the results of the avion
conference turning out the way they did
and
later on with the great revolt in
palestine that
led to britain closing the door there
the situation
was looking grim and hitler's vice was
getting tighter
as this drama was unfolding 1938 1939
there were as i mentioned about
6 000 russian jews already in shanghai
who had come during the second wave of
refugees
discussed last episode and who were
mostly concentrated in the french
concession
though tragedy and hard times was common
for many of these stateless russians
they had still carved out a wonderful
life for themselves in shanghai
we sort of touched on that world in that
whitey smith episode chp 193
now besides the russian jews and plenty
of white russians too
don't forget there were only about 500
german jews and about
a thousand baghdadi jews in shanghai
those two groups
lived mostly inside the international
settlement
the number of jews was still such that
you didn't really notice them on the
streets of shanghai yet
that's all going to change come 1939
after crystal knocked they started to
come
and by the time these jews arrived in
shanghai they were
carrying nothing except the clothes they
were wearing and a
handbag with a few possessions
with so many jews all in one place and
all desperate to get out of europe at
the same time
the nazis came up with a scheme whereby
if you wanted to leave
you couldn't be carrying more than 10
german marks that's it
no valuables no nothing 10 marks
whatever else you had squirreled away
they confiscated it
and the catch was that the shanghai
authorities later on will say look you
can't come here anymore unless you have
at least 400
per person so it was one of those kind
of things
but 1 374
jews managed to make their way to
shanghai in 1938 but
nobody was making it easy for them the
following year
1939 another 12 000 or more
will try and squeeze in and they'll be
the worst off of all those who chose the
shanghai option
you're probably thinking jesus was so
terrible what was happening in europe
with the
jews why not just book passage somewhere
and get out
well here was the rub jews were all
welcome to leave
since hitler came to power in 1933 the
jews had
gotten the hint and were encouraged to
get the hell out of germany
some left most didn't and now
in this desperate hour they had to find
a
way out in a hurry all you needed was an
exit visa
no you couldn't just leave in order to
board that plane
or vessel or train or even to book a
ticket for overseas passage to
anywhere if you were trying to get out
of the country
you needed an exit visa first permission
to leave
and in order to get that exit visa you
had to show proof that someone was
taking you in somewhere else
over the next several years for untold
numbers
there's going to be a lot of waiting in
cues for permits and for documents to be
stamped
pieces of paper that meant life or death
to a family
many waited in vain waiting for their
turn to get to the front of the line
before time ran out on them
i'm gonna introduce a couple people in
this series who
stepped up for the jews you're all
familiar with oscar schindler
and raul wallenberg who have been
particularly recognized for their
efforts and saving the lives of so many
jews
schindler by the way was running his uh
enamelware factory up in poland uh
1939 so all this drama we're talking
about now
was all concurrent with that time as far
as noted angels
who showed up for europe's jews let me
first introduced
her feng shun he was an amazing man
a lifelong lutheran he was fluent in
english and
german he was a chinese diplomat posted
to the consulate in vienna in 1937
and served as consul general now after
ancillars
all embassies in vienna were downgraded
to consulates
so then right after crystal knocked when
everything reached
peak urgency austrian jews
started knocking on the door of every
consulate in vienna
looking for visas and getting turned
down wherever they went
then word got out that at the chinese
consulate
the consul general was issuing visas
that allowed you safe passage to
shanghai
you see like i said shanghai by this
time
was up for grabs 1938 and into 1939
still nobody checking passports the
japanese
british germans chiang kai-shek the
rival wong chingway china government
the french they all had bigger fish to
fry
so really all you had to do was get
there
then once you got to shanghai as long as
you had the means
you could pretty much find passage to
almost any place in the world
at this urgent hour most jewish refugees
simply needed to get out of europe first
before they
started planning step two you know what
to do as soon as they got to shanghai
and these post-christelnacht jews by the
time they ran the gauntlet of every law
and regulation that targeted them as
they made their way to the exits
they were lucky to get out of europe
alive let alone with any
possessions or hidden diamonds or gold
so word got out in vienna and the
chinese consulate was the place to go
and in the immediate aftermath of
kristallnacht
issued it's estimated anywhere from two
to four
thousand visas to these austrian jews
desperately looking for a place to go
now not everyone took
her up on the notion of finding refuge
in china
if they just had that piece of paper
issued by him
that was good enough to get out of
austria thanks to huffangshan's humanity
these people got safe passage to
shanghai and elsewhere
they got to miss out on the holocaust
families who obtained these visas
were also able to use them to get
transit to
other places in the world there are
there are stories about
huffangshan's personal involvement in
making sure
every applicant got taken care of there
were stories of
jews dropping their passports in the
window of his car
as he drove down the street or stuffing
them in his mailbox at his residence
they saw what was happening and when no
one else was willing to step up
took matters into his own hand and so
over the orders of his superior
ambassador chun jia in berlin
he still went ahead and issued these
visas ambassador chun wasn't looking to
piss off the nazis so he tried to get
her feng shun
to cool it with the china visas the
germans of course found out what he was
up to
and the consulate ended up getting shut
down and today
this former consulate building it's the
vienna ritz carlton
but her feng shun continued issuing
these life-saving visas from his
apartment in vienna
until he got recalled back to china in
may of 1940.
it was said he was still issuing these
china visas up until his last day
after the war feng shan ended up having
a
bittersweet diplomatic career in the
service of the republic of china
government
he lived to a ripe old age dying in his
96th year in san francisco
all the lives of these austrian jews he
saved
he never mentioned it to anyone and kept
that under his hat his
whole life he never once said hey look
what i did
it was only after his passing that his
daughter
stumbled onto the secret and his papers
and whatnot
the world only got to find out about her
feng shun in 1997
when his obituary mentioned the deeds he
had done back in vienna
how many lives did huffangshan save
thousands for sure
yeah whatever it was a thousand five
thousand
the talmud says whoever saves the life
of israel
it is considered as if he saved an
entire world
in 2001 yad vashem the holocaust martyrs
and heroes remembrance authority in
israel
after discovering his story declared
righteous among nations same as oscar
schindler
and though more people know of schindler
from the spielberg movie
i encourage you to please also never
forget about the chinese schindler
as he's now known
in 2007 a decade after his passing
he was given honorary citizenship in
israel and here in the beautiful country
in 2008 senator orrin hatch
sponsored resolution 588 that honored
his deeds
and called him quote a man of great
courage and humanity
who saved the lives of thousands of
austrian jews between 1938
and 1940 in 1939
the extent of the persecution suffered
by jews
wasn't common knowledge yet therefore
any outpouring of sympathy
and regret felt for europe's jews had
yet to materialize
the concentration camps were still
unknown
nobody was feeling sorry for any
european jews and this impacted the
attitudes of the people and the
municipal authorities in shanghai
who had to deal with them
greatest influx of jews into shanghai
happened may june july and august of
these four months in particular were
causing
alarm bells to ring all throughout the
halls of power in shanghai
by then too many jewish refugees had
landed in shanghai and they went
straight to the international settlement
to
build a nest and this had upset the
entire ecosystem there
that was already reeling from the after
effects of the battle of shanghai
end of 1937 the french two were also
trying not to get overwhelmed in their
concession by the
situation i didn't mention this but the
french government
they helped out a lot of jews a lot made
it to shanghai
departing from the port of marseille and
arriving via saigon
the japanese too saw the jewish refugees
pouring into their little part of
shanghai in hong kong
it was a lot cheaper to live in hong
kong than in the international
settlement so
for those jews living on a budget this
was the preferred area to go to
as for the shanghai municipal council
the highest body
administering the city they were in over
their heads and the desperation over
what to do
led a lot of people at the top to harden
their hearts
and discuss the most drastic measures to
deal with the problem
loophole by loophole new regulation by
new regulation by the
end of 1939 they began to make it harder
and harder for these jews to find refuge
in shanghai
by mid-1940 they almost succeeded the
torrent
was back down to a trickle and with
everyone arriving as destitute as they
were
someone had to think fast on their feet
to come up with a way to help these
people and keep them from starving to
death
leaders of the jewish communities rose
to the fore
and in october 1938 the committee for
assistance of european jewish refugees
was established it became known as the
spielman committee
after its main organizer financier
michael spielman
beth aharon synagogue silas aaron
hardoon's gift to the shanghai sephardic
jewish community in 1927
became a reception center and makeshift
soup kitchen
this organization was a joint effort by
both the
spartak and ashkenazi communities there
were others
the oldest relief group was the hills
fund for deutsche uden
set up in 1914 it was already in place
and provided a ready safety net for the
first austrian jews who came after the
onslaught when
germany annexed austria the other major
organization that contributed to
keeping the jewish refugee community
afloat
was formed around another giant in this
struggle for survival
this was paul komar he was a hungarian
jew and a long-timer in shanghai
having first arrived in 1898
in august 1938 he helped set up the
international committee for granting
relief to european refugees
this committee uh became known as the
komar committee and they cooperated very
closely with the
shanghai municipal authorities to work
out any issues that came up
and they also helped to keep tabs on all
the jews and made sure everyone was
duly registered and in compliance with
whatever laws and
regulations there were they used to call
these papers that the jews had to carry
comar passes in german you know
after you get past the headlining stars
of this period
the sassoons kaduri's and hardoons
next level down were a lot of people you
probably never heard of but who were
movers and shakers throughout this
ordeal
michael spielman and paul komar were
among them
and all these people baghdadi jews
russian jews european jews everyone who
had the means
banded together to build an entire
support
infrastructure and to get it funded very
quickly
initially a nice chunk of the financing
to keep the soup kitchens running
and make sure these refugees had a roof
over their head
came courtesy of sir victor sassoon now
most of you
know of him as the guy who built the
peace hotel he was an early investor in
shanghai real estate and owned about
1800 properties all over the city and on
the bond
he lived quite a privileged and
fascinating life and got to enjoy a lot
of fine things
he was called the jp morgan of the
orient loved horse racing
quite a man in his time anyway sir
victor sassoon
was one of the major pillars that
supported the whole
shanghai jewish community throughout the
early part of the ordeal
horus and lawrence kaduri initially
worked for sir viktor sassoon
they were the sons of sir eli kidori the
family patriarch
the kaduri family would later become one
of the first families of hong kong and
go on to
magnificent things there but in this
hour of need
the kaduris were another financial
pillar in shanghai that held everything
up
lawrence kaduri by the way he too had an
interesting nickname
the asian rockefeller ah the yanks gotta
love him
and as rich and resourceful as all these
baghdadi jews were
these elites among the jews these early
arrivals who were long
present in shanghai before these
ashkenazi european and
russian jews started showing up by 1938
and certainly in 1939
even they with all their money
couldn't keep financing the relief
effort on their own
outside help was needed this is where
the jdc
enters the picture the jdc
was the american jewish joint
distribution committee
nice no-nonsense name it was referred to
as the joint
a lot of american money was raised by
concerned jews and other charities
and the jdc was the organization that
was responsible for writing the checks
and making sure the money
got to where it was supposed to go and
then people who worked for the jdc on
the other end
made sure it got dispersed as needed for
1938 it was a good enough system
and looking back at how primitive
everything was back then
compared to now as far as international
banking
communication logistics it's truly a
wonder how everything got done
they had some very resourceful and
determined people
many unsung heroes who
didn't get written into too many history
books who worked in the trenches and
behind the scenes to make sure
thousands of jewish families got at
least a
hunk of bread a boiled potato and enough
soup to keep them going for another day
until the next feeding until the
japanese shut them down after pearl
harbor
the jdc was the lifeline for many a
jewish refugee living on the edge
the first jewish refugee camp opened in
january 1939
four more would be opened as the numbers
swelled
two hospitals were built as well as a
school ten
thousand meals a day were served up
until the hard times hit
you see as bad as it was as much as
people were suffering
in 1939 and into 1940
they'd be calling these the good old
days before long especially after
december 7th 1941
horus kodori and brother lawrence in
had set up the shanghai jewish youth
association which became like
the local jcc and so much more
it funded schools and training centers
and provided
all kinds of activities for all the jews
who had been
born in shanghai and who had suddenly
found themselves there
the more enterprising among these jewish
refugees who had been
stripped of every fennig they had and
all their valuables
as soon as some of them docked in
shanghai after they were processed
and assigned lodging they would
immediately go scout out locations to
open a business
along horsham or joshon roads not
not everyone hustled but those who did
they had no trouble at first finding a
way to feed themselves and their family
if you were smart and you had a skill or
if you were a physician or
dentist you wouldn't have too many
problems getting by
but if you weren't the go-getter type or
if your days were spent studying the
talmud
the soup kitchen kept everyone fed oh
and one other thing
no matter if you were kosher or not the
soup kitchens only served up kosher
meals
as meager as they were i saw a
uh a video on youtube actually i saw so
many
youtube is inundated with so much
material about this period
and i encourage anyone interested to dig
a little deeper to go
check this treasure trove out but there
was one video i remember
they were interviewing this 93 year old
man well 93 at the time the
video was taken he was bedridden in a
hospital or a senior facility
and he was asked about his memories of
the jews and he said quote
the jewish people did business in
shanghai some were tailors
some were working as carpenters some
were bricklayers and some were barbers
they would hang a sign around their neck
with their business on it
they were really hard working and
thrifty and they did all kinds of
businesses
chinese did their businesses and the
jewish people did theirs
they didn't bother each other end quote
let me also mention around this time
1938-39
adolf eichmann and a couple other nazi
biggies
tried to carry out this plan that called
for mass deportation of german
and austrian jews to japan and china
this was
seriously considered but in the end
logistically not feasible and worst of
all very expensive
so that never happened besides all that
the japanese weren't too hot on the idea
the germans since 1933 had
really tried everything as far as
shoeing the jews out of the fatherland
and anywhere else they controlled but
the problem was
bigger and more expensive to resolve
than thought
and that's why in october of 1941
the nazis will give up on trying to
incentivize the jews to leave and
change to a more sinister and deadly
methodology i wanted to mention one more
thing
another great footnote from this history
but i think i'm going to save it
for next episode instead lots more
action to hear about in 1939 but for now
we're going to put the bookmark in i
only paid for 30 minutes of recording
time and they're very
very strict here at abbey road studios
if you weren't paying attention last
time i'm still using himalaya
nice podcast app if you're ready to
throw in the towel and your present one
i was using apple all these years i got
so
fed up now i'm happy once again of the
150 or so podcasts that i subscribe to
i only listen to about 10 of them
everything i listen to in regular
rotation
it's all subscribed to now in himalaya
no more getting flooded with all these
shows that i'm saving for a rainy day
never rains here in southern california
anyway it's got a real nice and clean
interface
easy to use free too it's fast becoming
the
official podcast app of the china
history podcast
go download it in the google or apple
stores with my compliments
himalaya hello gold mountain getting
closer
if you live anywhere near musicville usa
the city of nashville
founded in 1779 you'll get a chance to
see my
favorite gujang performer and singer
wufei
along with the talented and accomplished
mr chaney ezra blumenkranz on the ode
backed by vanderbilt university's own
chatterbird ensemble
they will debut hello gold mountain
february 2019
at ingram hall hello gold mountain
a requiem for lost possibilities of the
jewish community of shanghai
this original composition for chamber
orchestra
the finishing touches of which wufei is
working on as we speak
was inspired by the actual stories of
those jewish refugees
who escaped to shanghai during world war
ii
i might fly in on the tcup media private
jet for that performance
hello goldmountain.com for more info
okay that's it for this time
lasla montgomery here signing off from
los angeles california
imploring you as i always do to consider
coming back next time
a mere two weeks away for another
exciting episode
of the china history podcast